Docs: Update reference for the extensions (#954)
grafana/plugin-tools: docusaurus/docs/tutorials/ui-extensions/register-an-extension.md

    if (!meta.jsonData.isExtensionEnabled) {
      return null;
    }

    return <div>Plugin specific setting: {meta.jsonData.foo}</div>;
  },
});
```

## Troubleshooting

### My link is not appearing

1. **Check the console logs** - there is a good chance that your link is not appearing due to some validation errors. In this case you should see some relevant logs in your browsers console.
1. **Check the `targets`** - make sure that you are using the correct extension point ids (always use the `PluginExtensionPoints` enum for Grafana extension points)
1. **Check the links `configure()` function** - in case your link has a `configure()` function it can happen that it is returning `undefined` under certain conditions, which hides the link.
1. **Check if you register too many links** - certain extension points limit the number of links allowed per plugin, and in case your plugin registers more than one links for the same extension point there is a chance that some of them are filtered out.
1. **Check the Grafana version** - link and component extensions are only supported after Grafana version **`>=10.1.0`**, while `addLink()` is only supported in versions **>=`11.1.0`**.

> 

Reviewer: We need examples showing how to support both APIs during a transition phase. Question is if this should be described in a separate page. WDYT @sympatheticmoose @mckn?

Reviewer 2: would it make sense as a migration guide?

Reviewer 3: I think the migration guide is a good place for this.

---
id: register-an-extension
title: Register an extension
description: Make part of the UI extendable with links or components defined by plugins
keywords:
  - grafana
  - plugins
  - plugin
  - extensions
  - ui-extensions
sidebar_position: 20
---

An "extension" is either a link or a React component defined by a plugin and rendered either somewhere in the core Grafana UI or in an other app plugin.

> [Read more about extensions under key concepts](../../key-concepts/ui-extensions.md).

Reviewer 2: as in create an extension point

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/grafana/plugin-tools/pull/954/commits/999f5a2263de23d9f7fd41e5f47d07843fc71ed7.

| **Link**      | Links have a `path` and an `onClick()` property. <br /><br /> **When to use?** <br /> Use links if you would like to give plugins a way to define custom user actions for a part of your UI. These actions can either just be cross-links to the plugin, or using `onClick()` methods they can implement a more interactive on-page experience with a modal. <br /><br /> **API reference** <br /> - [`.addLink()`](../../reference/ui-extensions/addLink.md) - registering a link from a plugin <br /> - [`usePluginLinks()`](../../reference/ui-extensions/usePluginLinks.md) - fetching links registered for an extension point |

> | **Component** | Components are React components that can be used to render a custom user experience. <br /><br /> **When to use?** <br /> Use components if you would like to give more freedom for plugins to extend your UI, for example to extend a configuration form with custom parts. <br /><br /> **API reference** <br /> - [`.addComponent()`](../../reference/ui-extensions/addComponent.md) - registering a component from a plugin <br /> - [`usePluginComponents()`](../../reference/ui-extensions/usePluginComponents.md) - fetching components registered for an extension point                                                   |

Reviewer 2: We should likely extract this to a partial and then reference here and in create an extension point

## Links

### Best practices for adding links

> - **Define a `path`** - it is always good if your action can also be opened in a new tab using a link.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we can claim this as a best practice as it basically says "dont do onClick"

Reviewer 2: nit: elsewhere with best practices you've used new lines rather than - , we should be consistent

Author: Hmm, yeah, maybe you are right 🤔 

What do you think @sunker / @mckn ?

Reviewer 3: hmm, I guess it depends on. If the action will trigger a modal then a path isn't applicable so I guess it depends on the flow. Maybe rephrase it to something like:

When the link results in a navigation favor `path` over `onClick` to create native links for the browser.

Reviewer: This feels like a general guidance in web development, so not sure we need to describe this here. Me and @mckn agreed to removed this bullet point.

    // Returning an empty object means no updates to any of the properties.
    return {};
  },
});
```

### Open a modal from the `onClick()`

```tsx
import { PluginExtensionPoints } from '@grafana/data';
import { Button, Modal } from '@grafana/ui';

export const plugin = new AppPlugin().addLink({
  title: '...',
  description: '...',
  targets: [PluginExtensionPoints.DashboardPanelMenu],
  // `event` - the `React.MouseEvent` from the click event
  // `context` - the `context` object shared with the extensions
  onClick: (event, { openModal, context }) =>
    openModal({
      title: 'My modal',
      width: 500, // (Optional) - width of the modal in pixels
      height: 500, // (Optional) - height of the modal in pixels

      // Calling `onDismiss()` closes the modal
      body: ({ onDismiss }) => (
        <div>
          <div>This is our modal.</div>

          <Modal.ButtonRow>
            <Button variant="secondary" fill="outline" onClick={onDismiss}>
              Cancel
            </Button>
            <Button onClick={onDismiss}>Ok</Button>
          </Modal.ButtonRow>
        </div>
      ),
    }),
});
```

## Components

### Best practices for adding components

> - **Use the props** - check what props the extension point is passing to the components and use them to implement a more tailored experience

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Use the props** - check what props the extension point is passing to the components and use them to implement a more tailored experience.
```

> - **Wrap your component with providers** - if you want to access any plugin specific state in your component make sure to wrap it with the necessary React context providers (e.g. for Redux)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Wrap your component with providers** - if you want to access any plugin specific state in your component make sure to wrap it with the necessary React context providers (e.g. for Redux)
```
```suggestion
- **Wrap your component with providers** - if you want to access any plugin specific state in your component make sure to wrap it with the necessary React context providers (e.g. for Redux).
```

> - **Use the enum for Grafana extension point ids** - if you are registering a component to one of the available Grafana extension points, make sure that you use the [`PluginExtensionPoints` enum exposed by the `@grafana/data`](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/main/packages/grafana-data/src/types/pluginExtensions.ts#L121) package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Use the enum for Grafana extension point IDs** - if you are registering a component to one of the available Grafana extension points, make sure that you use the [`PluginExtensionPoints` enum exposed by the `@grafana/data`](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/main/packages/grafana-data/src/types/pluginExtensions.ts#L121) package.
```

### Register a component

```tsx
import { PluginExtensionPoints } from '@grafana/data';

export const plugin = new AppPlugin().addComponent({
  title: 'User profile tab',
  description: '...',
  targets: [PluginExtensionPoints.UserProfileTab],
  component: () => <div>This is a new tab on the user profile page.</div>,
});
```

### Accessing plugin meta in a component

> You can use the `usePluginContext()` hook to access any plugin specific meta information inside your component. The hook [returns a `PluginMeta` object](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/main/packages/grafana-data/src/types/plugin.ts#L62). (This can be useful because the component that you register from your plugin won't be rendered under the React tree of your plugin, but somewhere else in the UI.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the `usePluginContext()` hook to access any plugin specific meta information inside your component. The hook returns a [`PluginMeta`](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/main/packages/grafana-data/src/types/plugin.ts#L62) object. This can be useful because the component that you register from your plugin won't be rendered under the React tree of your plugin, but somewhere else in the UI.
```

```tsx
import { usePluginContext, PluginExtensionPoints } from '@grafana/data';

export const plugin = new AppPlugin().addComponent({
  title: 'User profile tab',
  description: '...',
  targets: [PluginExtensionPoints.UserProfileTab],
  component: () => {
    const { meta } = usePluginContext();

    // The `jsonData` property is an object that your plugin can manage
    // using the Grafana Rest APIs
    return <div>Plugin specific setting: {meta.jsonData.foo}</div>;
  },
});
```

### Access plugin state in a component

```tsx
import { PluginExtensionPoints } from '@grafana/data';
import { MyCustomDataProvider } from './MyCustomDataProvider';

export const plugin = new AppPlugin().addComponent({
  title: 'User profile tab',
  description: '...',
  targets: [PluginExtensionPoints.UserProfileTab],
  component: () => (
    <MyCustomDataProvider>
      <div>Plugin specific setting: {meta.jsonData.foo}</div>
    </MyCustomDataProvider>
  ),
});
```

### Hide a component in certain conditions

> This is nothing new for developers working with React, just return `null` from your component in order to not render anything (to hide it).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Simply return `null` from your component in order to not render anything and thereby hide the component.
```

```tsx
import { usePluginContext, PluginExtensionPoints } from '@grafana/data';

export const plugin = new AppPlugin().addComponent({
  title: 'User profile tab',
  description: '...',
  targets: [PluginExtensionPoints.UserProfileTab],
  component: () => {
    const { meta } = usePluginContext();

    // For the sake of the example this condition is relying on a `jsonData` property
    // that is managed by your plugin
    if (!meta.jsonData.isExtensionEnabled) {
      return null;
    }

    return <div>Plugin specific setting: {meta.jsonData.foo}</div>;
  },
});
```

> ## Troubleshooting

Reviewer 2: Maybe better as a new separate page

Author: Yeah, maybe that's a good idea!

Reviewer: Will be handled in a follow up pr. Task added in https://github.com/grafana/grafana-community-team/issues/131.

### My link is not appearing

> 1. **Check the console logs** - there is a good chance that your link is not appearing due to some validation errors. In this case you should see some relevant logs in your browsers console.

Reviewer 2: Maybe give an example of a log line?

Author: I think that's a good idea, yeah. @mckn which log you think we should add as an example?

Reviewer 3: Probably the one with an invalid extension point id.

Reviewer: We tried adding a log example, but it's hard to get this to look good since we're using a numbered list. Let's skip this for now.

1. **Check the `targets`** - make sure that you are using the correct extension point ids (always use the `PluginExtensionPoints` enum for Grafana extension points)
1. **Check the links `configure()` function** - in case your link has a `configure()` function it can happen that it is returning `undefined` under certain conditions, which hides the link.
1. **Check if you register too many links** - certain extension points limit the number of links allowed per plugin, and in case your plugin registers more than one links for the same extension point there is a chance that some of them are filtered out.
1. **Check the Grafana version** - link and component extensions are only supported after Grafana version **`>=10.1.0`**, while `.addLink()` is only supported in versions **>=`11.1.0`**.

> ### My component is not appearing

Reviewer 2: there is a lot of overlap, could we combine most into My extension is not appearing?

Author: Yeah, I think they could be combined indeed. Maybe I would leave that for an upcoming PR though - just to make this one easier to manage.

Reviewer 3: Added an item to the epic to combine these two into one section called "My extension is not appearing?"

https://github.com/grafana/grafana-community-team/issues/131
